---
layout: post
title: Small Group Leadership Brunch Speech
---

One cold February evening a couple of years ago, as folks were saying their
goodbyes after small group, the leaders approached me and asked if I'd be
interested in learning to lead, as they both had other commitments and callings
taking them elsewhere over the coming months. Excited by the opportunity, I
accepted.

Just a few weeks later, a pandemic swept the globe,
and the small group's meetings for the remainder of the semester were
reduced to Jack-box games on Zoom. With all the chaos, we decided to put the
group on hold for the summer and, as new leaders, we'd circle back in the fall
when things calmed down a bit.

As you all might recall, things didn't calm down. For the next nine months, my
small group leadership experience was inaugurated on conference calls, many of
which were taken from the same room where my diapers were changed a quarter of a
century ago.

It was awkward; it was confusing; despite us all doing everything we thought was good to build community, we had
never felt more alone.

If you're anything like me, you hear a story like that, and your God-given
instinct for redemption and justice says, "Wow! Those were some tough times:
clearly God was working miracles for the devil to be fighting so hard!" You're
looking forward to me turning the page and describing transformation. "Isn't it
such a joy going through those trials, watching Satan squirm before the
inevitable fall?"

I want to be transparent with you all. We talk to each other about these battles
as though every move is choreographed, every attack hits armor. But the enemy
plays dirty; the enemy isn't ashamed to hit low; why would he do otherwise?

By April of 2021 I didn't have hope. My eyes were dim, only able to see my own
life stagnating as the world---even others in the small group---seemed to move
on. I talked to Micah, handed off the leadership, and stepped away for a few
months. Even upon returning, I was a passive and hesitant member of Marshall's
group. It was only through his unprecedented patience, encouragement, and
example that I started leading again.

So why do we lead? Why do I? Not every sun rises, when it comes to our own
perspective and desires. Sometimes things fall apart, and no matter who you talk
to and how much you pray, nothing tells you where you might have gone wrong.

I was encouraged by Lee's sermon on Rahab last Sunday. The question stuck with
me: would Rahab's actions have been any more or less faithful if Jericho's
outcome were different? Surely there was a bakery in that city she loved to
visit. She never got to taste that bread again. A lively street corner, a
rooftop with a serene view of the sunset, all was wiped out---despite Rahab
doing everything in her power to live out faith in a God she had only heard
rumors of.

Was she content with that outcome?

God is a God of miracles, yes. But I often forget that God's miracles span
generations, even millennia. Rahab became part of the earthly lineage of Jesus.
But in the moment of her walking away from the ruins of Jericho, she could not
possibly turn to that reality for comfort. But she could turn to her father, her
family, alive by her side.

I do not have a sublime miracle to point to that justifies the difficult times.
But I do have a conversation with a friend who was struggling with lying to a
family member, and decided to come clean. I do have the piercing and loving
advice from co-leaders, guidance that has led me through battles with anxiety
and lust.

They may not be big things. They may not be what we want in the next month, or
next year. But even if we never see the grand outcome in this lifetime, we can
rest knowing that God---the God who loves us, pays our debt for us---he delights
in seeing our faith. He's writing an awesome story, spanning generations, and
he's glad we're taking a part in it.

That's why I lead.
