---
layout: post
title: Access vs. Ownership
date: 2017-05-29
banner: /assets/images/2017/05/access-vs-ownership/clean-pods.jpg
tags:
  - personal
  - lifestyle
comments: true
---
Recently I came across advertising online for a new co-living experiment taking
place in Los Angeles. The name of the startup is PodShare. Essentially, the goal
is to provide customers with location-independent access to a minimal set of
resources necessary to live and work effectively in an urban environment. <!--more--> A bunk
on a wooden frame, a charging station, and a chalkboard identifying the
inhabitant are included in the package; doors, locks, and curtains are not.
Aside from the bed itself, all areas within a PodShare location are public: the
refrigerator and cooking utilities are shared, workspaces are common, and the
restrooms are handled dormitory-style. Maintaining a clean and safe environment
is as much the residents' job as it is the staff's, in the sense that everyone's
space can be seen from all angles, creating an aura of community watch.

![PodShare bunk beds](/assets/images/2017/05/access-vs-ownership/clean-pods.jpg "A typical quiet afternoon amongst the pods")

If this description is hard to visualize, a good video providing an overview and
history of the startup can be found
[here](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=H_ILu-R-Nz8).

## The Bare Luxuries

My initial reaction to this foreign living concept could be described best as a
shameful terror. Terror, because I couldn't imagine living in a situation so
hostile to privacy and ownership of space. Shame, because in the culture that is
starting this movement towards "Housing as a Service," I recognize values and
visions that I myself hold dear. Would rejecting this development make me a
hypocrite?

In truth, the initiative of PodShare makes several steps toward a lifestyle that
I have learned to esteem. To enjoy a content and fulfilling life in such an
environment, you can't have too much baggage: there aren't many nooks large
enough for one to unload their extra belongings, and there aren't many ears
patient enough for one to unload their ponderous past. "Podestrians," as they
are called, must minimize their possessions to the bare necessities. Wherever
one life is lacking, another life is prepared and encouraged to fill the gap.

The environmental benefits are also considerable. The most bare-bones apartment
complex that could accommodate the same number of men and women would require at
least three times the land area and an order of magnitude more capital
resources, not to mention the marginal costs and inefficiencies associated with
independent thermostats, water lines, and electric service. Furthermore,
splitting the community into individual _houses_ would practically necessitate
the construction of a new subdivision: an impossibility in any principally urban
environment.

Taking the idea to an even larger scale, PodShare claims that if it were to
expand its influence far enough, one would no longer need to book a hotel when
travelling. After all, a bed in one location is a bed in _any_ location with a
vacancy--just check out of your hometown PodShare and catch a bus to your new
location! How inconceivable that freedom is to the modern American citizen: the
concept that moving across the country for a week, month, or indefinitely could
be as simple as packing some carry-ons and catching a flight. Realtors,
mortgages, and moving vans need not apply. Sell your house, and ditch that
timeshare too: **your bed *is* your timeshare now.**

## Ownership's Intrinsic Value

PodShare challenges our very definitions of house and home. "The future is
access, not ownership," claims Elvina Beck, the founder of the company.
Millennials invest in gym memberships, public transportation, and music
streaming services rather than purchasing the physical capital necessary to
enjoy these luxuries for ourselves. Why not extend that idea to our very homes?

![Elvina Beck](/assets/images/2017/05/access-vs-ownership/community.jpg "The occasional evening activity creates a sense of community. Hopefully nobody was looking to sleep tonight.")

I do agree that, in the general case, owning less can lead to living more. Our
culture in the United States has lost much of that compassionate, cooperative
nature that first brought society together when individuals would have failed
living alone. To put less reliance on the grasp of one's own two hands, and
instead seek to be a strength in others' weaknesses as they likewise provide
what you may lack, fills one's soul in a beautiful and irreplaceable manner.

But to what extent must we deny our own desire for control over physical
possessions to reap the intangible benefits of a cooperative lifestyle? Are
there not memories, emotions, and even fragments of our identity engrained in
our living spaces that could not exist without a sense of locality, of
ownership?

Motivational speaker [Ben Glenn](http://www.simplybenglenn.com/) offers a
powerful example of this concept. To this day, I can recall with vivid detail
the Spring evening in 2009 when I witnessed him transform a black canvas into an
breathtaking explosion of variegated color before our eyes. The audience
journeyed with him step by step through the discovery process of artistic
creation, and by the end of the experience we all felt as though we, too, owned
the final work. Watching Ben share the exact same message at a different venue
or via a different medium holds none of the same gravity for me, because my
ownership and identity is contained in that one particular event, time, and
place.

Would I be satisfied if, rather than attending that 2009 conference, I simply
received a recording of the event, to be viewed on demand at any location or
time? More importantly, if I had never experienced the original, _would I even
know what I was missing from the experience?_

![Ben Glenn](/assets/images/2017/05/access-vs-ownership/ben-glenn.jpg "Ben may create the same drawing thousands of times, but the one he crafted when I was in attendance was uniquely mine. No recreation does it justice.")

I do not believe I could describe with any accuracy the psychological difference
between owning a home and having geographically-independent access to shelter,
but I can only imagine that the effect would be similar to replacing such an
intimate artistic experience with a recording. Though the instrumental value of
housing has been demonstrated to be extractable into an on-demand construct, the
spirit of home feels tied intrinsically to geography. Stripping ourselves of
that luxury may not leave us physically homeless, but surely impoverished in
spirit. As Yi-Fu Tuan would perhaps characterize the change, we would be
accumulating the freedom of _space_ at the expense of the identity and security of
_place_.[^1]

## A Divine Model

For much of His ministry on earth, Jesus was truly homeless. "Foxes have dens
and birds of the sky have nests, but the Son of Man has no place to lay His
head," Jesus stated in response to a scribe's possibly naive proclamation of
devotion.[^2] Were His disciples willing to give up not only the physical comforts
of shelter, but the very identity tied to their earthly homes, in order to
accept adoption into God's kingdom by Christ's sacrifice? In what capacity is my
worldly identity preventing me from perceiving the transformation that God so
desires to work in His child and slave?

And on a deeper inspection of Christ's life, giving up house did not mean giving
up home. His ties to his earthly family were not lost: rather, He found His
family multiplied to all who followed the will of His Father.[^3] He shared
meals with brothers in the houses of the rich and poor, in the city and on the
beach, with intimacy and with thousands. He invested none of His identity in an
earthly dwelling, and yet He has arguably produced the greatest impact on
history and society that any individual has ever effected.

I'm not ashamed to admit that, given my upbringing and human nature, the idea of
housing as evanescent "access" in contrast to home ownership scares me. But
looking at the life of my King, as well as the consequences of our past and our
hopes for the future, I believe that this physical and cultural transformation
may have the potential for great salutary good, should we give it the proper
thought and introspection.

...And let's be honest, PodShare has no plans for global domination by any
extent: they still receive most of their business from millennial vagabonds and
summer camps. We have ample time to reflect and discuss!

What are your thoughts on this housing movement? Let me know in the comments
below.

[^1]: For a fascinating and edifying discussion on this topic, see Tuan's work
    [Space and Place](
    https://www.upress.umn.edu/book-division/books/space-and-place).

[^2]: Matthew 8:20, HCSB

[^3]: Matthew 12:49-50
