---
layout: post
title: Invisalign of the Heart
date: 2023-03-06 14:53 -0500
---
For the second time in my life, I am undergoing the tedious and painful
experience of tooth re-alignment. As a coping mechanism, why not pontificate on
how Invisalign can serve as a spiritual allegory?

<!--more-->

There are worse ways to cope, I suppose.

---

{>|}![mouth with Invisalign](https://vkdds.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/09/invisalign-770x460-1.jpg "I can't believe it's not braces!")

After completely forgetting the horrors of middle school braces, over the past
several years I allowed myself to lose my retainer and let my teeth slip---just
enough to warrant a few months of Invisalign to get things on the right track.
Hearing from my orthodontist the options, Invisalign seemed like an effortless
remedy for the consequences of my past neglect: transparent plastic, removable
at any time, no pain from popped wires, no eating restrictions... Life would be
great!

But as any teenager or adult with recent orthodontic treatment will tell you,
Invisalign is _not_ a walk in the park, especially jumping into the process
"fresh" without recent braces or retainer use.

{|<} ![cross-section diagram of tooth](https://st3.depositphotos.com/11203256/18962/v/600/depositphotos_189625402-stock-illustration-tooth-cut-medical-diagram-structure.jpg "A misleading picture: the spongy texture of the alveolar bone is a far cry from the pain you feel when pressure is applied.")

Your teeth are always slightly mobile: if not, how would they move out of
alignment in the first place? The roots sit in a container of dense cartilage,
similar to the material that shapes your nose. No matter how tough, however,
cartilage is still movable. Natural chewing, clenching, and activity will put
pressure on the teeth that allow the cartilage to shift, break down, and re-form
over the course of years.

{>|} \*[Yep, it's biblical.](https://www.biblegateway.com/verse/en/Song%20of%20Solomon%204%3A2)

Orthodontic treatments all capitalize on this same flexibility when putting
one's teeth back in place. They put constant pressure on the teeth to move them
in new directions, out of the way of others and into two perfect rows of
freshly-shorn sheep\*. Furthermore, this pressure is applied in an extreme and
optimal way, to expedite the alignment process and overcome the natural
pressures of biting and chewing.

Invisalign in particular is a coveted form of treatment:

-   It can be removed at any time
-   It is transparent: nearly invisible to onlookers
-   Breakages or malfunctions do not typically cause pain (unlike popped wires
    from braces)

So, given all of those benefits, who am I to complain?

## I'm Still Going to Complain

Upon forking over the several hundred dollars for the retainer and popping it
in, I enjoyed a about five seconds of satisfaction with my purchase before the
buyer's remorse started to kick in.

I first noticed how difficult it was to speak properly with this plastic in my
mouth. I suddenly had a mild and annoying lisp, a speech impediment that wasn't
quick to disappear with a bit of practice. You can only imagine my embarrassment
at work, attempting to lead meetings about "cruthial bithnith dethithions" and
constantly apologizing for my lisp.

> If Invisalign is supposed to be invisible, why must I preface every
> conversation with an apology about their existence?

The pain kicked in after about eight hours. The tooth aching was anticipated: I
knew that moving teeth around would create some adjustment pains. The unexpected
issue was the dreadful irritation and cutting of my gums and tongue. For nearly
a week, the flesh in my mouth revolted against the foreign plastic encasing my
teeth, becoming covered in scrapes and sores rendering even soft foods painful
to consume. In vain I acquired emery boards to sand down the "sharp" edges of
the retainer, only to realize that the edges were already perfectly smooth: my
mouth simply hated the mere presence of the equipment.

My lips were constantly chapped, dining was an excruciating ordeal, and my every
word reminded the whole vicinity of the new operation taking place on my teeth.

## The Second Hole is the Hardest

"Surely things got better after that first adjustment period! Folks wear these
for several years: it can't be that bad!"

Yes, the initial pain did recede after that first week. My lisp was no longer
noticeable, my tongue learned not to scrape against the plastic, and my jaw
adjusted to this new pressure.

However, I still looked upon the procedure with a fair amount of antipathy. The
pain was gone, but my lifestyle was still significantly impacted.

You can eat or drink _nothing but water_ when your equipment is in. Nothing else
is acceptable, even sparkling water. For every meal, snack, or drink, at home or
on the road, for fuel or for social occasions, you must remove your Invisalign
with clean hands and stow it in your case. By consequence, you must also carry
your case everywhere---unless you want to wrap your retainer in bathroom paper
towels and leave them out on the table with you.

When is the last time a tin of chewing tobacco bulging out of your pocket was in
style? Yeah, I can't remember either.

You may counter, "but at least you have the flexibility to remove it whenever
you want!" Ah, but the small print in the contract says otherwise: Invisalign
must remain in your mouth **for 22 hours a day** in order to be effective. Yep,
you read that right.

"Ah, but two hours across three meals, that's 40 minutes a meal, you're fine!"

How many people do you know that only eat at mealtimes, consuming nothing but
pure water at all other points of the day? No snacks, no coffee or tea, no
Friday-evening happy hour with friends. Especially when considering someone with
a fairly active lifestyle, you simply can't nourish yourself appropriately
getting all of your calories in just three meals.

And remember, every single time you remove and replace your Invisalign, you must
first clean your teeth of any food or plaque that has built up as a result of
your indulgence. Twice-a-day dental hygiene doesn't cut it anymore, because the
plastic barrier around your teeth prevents your saliva and tongue from doing
their natural, gradual decomposition and cleanup of lingering food. You're
pressing all of that stuff directly against your enamel otherwise.

---

So I looked at the life I had made for myself, and felt thoroughly disappointed.
In the evenings I'd inspect my teeth, compare them to Reddit horror stories, and
think to myself, "I'm really not that bad off! There's one bottom front tooth
that's slightly out of alignment. Do I really need to spend hundreds of dollars
to move it back? Not to mention the hours of time and mental effort it takes to
maintain this practice. No one sees that tooth when I smile. It's not causing
any toothaches. Why not just get a nighttime retainer and call it a day?"

It struck me, as I was making these compromises with myself, how much my
petulance sounded like the complaints I'd often express to God during rough
patches in other areas of my life. In fact, almost everything about Invisalign
seemed quite apropos to compare with the circumstances God uses to grow us.

## Invisalign of the Heart

> God, create a clean heart for me
> and renew a steadfast spirit within me.
>
> -- Psalm 51:10

It's a lovely prayer. We recognize the depth of our own transgression, our lack
of alignment with God, and we say, "I'm sorry! Please forgive and repair me!"
Or, perhaps there was no acute wrongdoing, but we see things in our walks with
God that could be better, and we ask him to work in us and transform us into his
image.

{|<} ![water running through cupped hands](https://www.praise.com/wp-content/uploads/6.09-scaled.jpg "Does living water stain Invisalign? ðŸ¤”")

Cool! God gladly accepts our request for redemption and sanctification. He
crafts a nifty little plastic mold that is _almost_ the same shape as our heart,
slaps it in place, and says "For best results, wear it for a minimum of 24 hours
per day."

We're excited for about five seconds. Then we try to do some of the most basic
things that used to fill our lives (speak! eat!), and find that everything has
become unnatural, uncomfortable. All of our old activities now have this ball
and chain tied to them.

Just like Invisalign, sanctification is not often seen or recognized by our
peers, yet it is a constant presence (dare I say, inconvenience) in our own
lives. Folks notice the side effects: for Invisalign, "where did that lisp
come from?" or, "are you on a new diet?" and for sanctification, "you used to be
much funnier! Relax!" or, "remind me again when you became a sober curmudgeon?"

You just can't stand having it on all day, so you take it off once in a while
for relief from the discomfort. Looking at your heart, you start thinking, "what
the heck? It's not really that bad! Certainly not as rough as some folks I see
on Reddit. This whole process isn't even necessary. I'm wasting my time and
mental health over petty details: let me just be satisfied with who I was."

Watching your heart hour by hour, and day by day, you feel the pain but you
don't see any improvement at all. You still feel drawn to all of your old
life---even more so, now that the habits are in the spotlight with this new
procedure---and the aligner is only causing unnecessary pain.

{>|} ![soft-body Tetris game](https://cdn.mos.cms.futurecdn.net/wtGrJj5YzeaNdyCzaurDPe-1200-80.jpg "Soft-body Tetris: as if normal Tetris wasn't infuriating enough.")

At regular intervals, God shows up with a new alignment mold for you to wear.
Oftentimes, it pushes against portions of your heart that seem completely
unrelated to the task at hand. It seems that he's never just satisfied with a
surgical fix of the one issue you originally asked about. He's playing some
divine game of seven-dimensional Tetris with the pieces of your heart, with an
ostensible disregard for even a bit of your own comfort.

But God reminds you that this process was never promised to be easy. It would
come with plenty of pain, much of which you wouldn't understand in the moment.
It's a long-term commitment---a commitment of a lifetime---and requires patience
and perseverance, even when progress seems slow or you find yourself
backsliding. The adjustments being made are numerous, diverse, and tiny: every
one of them serves a purpose, even if you can't see their significance in the
moment (or even see the impact at all). Faithfulness and trusting the story will
result in a better version of yourself, though: a version closer to the divine
image in which you were created, closer to the God whose faithful love has
opened a door for you to enjoy an eternal relationship with him.

---

God never forces the issue: just like it was your choice to start the treatment,
you can always say "enough" and throw away the aligner. Who knows: maybe you've
learned enough good habits at that point to keep your heart healthy for a couple
weeks, or a month or two. I know from experience: it feels pretty good to walk
around with nothing "bothering" my teeth or soul.

But I also know that freedom only lasts for so long. If God isn't straightening
my heart (or the aligner isn't straightening my teeth), the world has plenty of
pressures that take me any number of different directions.

Now, is my orthodontist God? Certainly not! Nor do I think I'll be making
transformative spiritual changes based on this little analogy. But, at the very
least, it has given me a bit more strength to continue wearing these darn
plastic sheets in my mouth!
